[Profiling in PyTorch] Part 2 (#3408)
huggingface/blog: torch-mlp-fusion.md

---
title: "Profiling in PyTorch (Part 2): From nn.Linear to a Fused MLP"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-mlp-fusion/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: ariG23498
  - user: ror
---

# Profiling in PyTorch (Part 2): From nn.Linear to a Fused MLP

![Thumbnail of the blog post](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/thumbnail.png)

In the [first part of this series "Profiling in PyTorch"](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler), we used `torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)` to learn how to read PyTorch profiler traces. We talked about the CPU dispatch chain, launch overhead, the difference between an overhead-bound and a compute-bound regime, and the internals of `torch.compile`.

In the second iteration (this blog post), we climb one rung up the ladder. We replace the hand-written matmul-add pair with an `nn.Linear` (with `bias=True`). This is the building block every deep learning model uses. We then stack three of them, with an activation in between, to form a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) block.

> [!NOTE]

> > The scripts for this blog post live here: [`02_linear.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/02_linear.py), [`03_simple_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_simple_mlp.py), and [`03_kernels_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_kernels_mlp.py). Like before, it helps to open them in a separate tab and walk through the code as you read. We use the `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts. It is really easy to setup a GPU on the Hugging Face infrastructure and experiment with the scripts using the [Dev Mode with Spaces](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/spaces-dev-mode). One could also run the scripts with the [Hugging Face Jobs pipeline](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/en/guides/jobs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The scripts for this blog post live here: [`02_linear.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/02_linear.py), [`03_simple_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_simple_mlp.py), and [`03_kernels_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_kernels_mlp.py). Like before, it helps to open them in a separate tab and walk through the code as you read. We use the `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts. It is really easy to setup a GPU on the Hugging Face infrastructure and experiment with the scripts using [Dev Mode with Spaces](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/spaces-dev-mode). One could also run the scripts with the [Hugging Face Jobs pipeline](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/en/guides/jobs).
```

Before we begin, a quick recap of two ideas we will lean on repeatedly:

1. A GPU **kernel** is a program that runs in parallel on many threads of the GPU.
2. The CPU **schedules and launches** these kernels. Most of the PyTorch overhead you see in a profiler trace is this scheduling work.

## From matmul-add to Linear

`nn.Linear` is a module wrapper around the same matrix multiplication and addition we already profiled in [Part 1](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler). The only difference is that it owns its weight and bias as parameters and exposes a `forward` method that PyTorch users have grown familiar with.

```py
# bias=True would truly emulate the multiplication and addition
# operations we have seen in part 1 of the series
linear_layer = nn.Linear(in_dim, out_dim, bias=True)
y = linear_layer(x)
```

The operation at hand can be written as:

```
y = x @ w.T + b
```

Where `x` is the input, `w` is the weight and `b` is the bias. Let's run [`02_linear.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/02_linear.py) and check the profile.

```bash
uv run 02_linear.py --batch 1024 --in_dim 32 --out_dim 64
uvx trace-util traces -b traces

> ```

Reviewer: Perhaps we could remind people what this does?

| :--: |
| Figure 1: Profiler trace of `nn.Linear` |

Figure 1 shows the profiler trace of a forward call of the linear layer. We trace the `forward` call of the linear layer with a similar `schedule` setup as the previous traces, with `wait=1`, `warmup=1` and `active=3`. This is why we see three Profile Steps in the CPU and GPU lanes.

### What is the transpose doing?

| ![Zoomed in CPU dispatch chain showing the aten::t transpose op nested before aten::addmm inside aten::linear, with no matching activity on the GPU lane](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/transpose-cpu-dispatch.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 2: The transpose CPU row |

If we zoom into the profiler trace, as we do in Figure 2, we notice an `aten::t` (transpose) op before the `aten::addmm` (multiplication and addition) op. We can already figure out that `nn.Linear` transposes the weight parameter and then multiplies it with the input. This is the reason we see an `aten::t` op.

> An important thing to notice is that `aten::t` only rewrites tensor metadata (shape and stride) on the CPU; it does not launch a kernel on the GPU. One can verify this two ways: by looking at the GPU lane in the trace, or by checking the `aten::t` row in the profiler table and the time it took on CUDA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An important thing to notice is that `aten::t` does not really copy or reorganize data: it only rewrites tensor metadata (shape and stride) on the CPU to represent the transposed matrix. It does not launch a kernel on the GPU. One can verify this two ways: by looking at the GPU lane in the trace, or by checking the `aten::t` row in the profiler table and the time it took on CUDA.
```

Trying to make it more explicit.
(Perhaps a visualization of how the strides are modified to represent the transposed data could be helpful)

> ### Where are add and mul kernels seperately?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Why are there no separate `mul` and `add` kernels?
```

`nn.Linear` calls `torch.nn.functional.linear`, which in turn calls `aten::linear`. `aten::linear` looks at the inputs, notices that a bias was passed, and dispatches `aten::addmm(bias, x, weight)` instead of doing a matmul and an add separately. `addmm` computes:

```
out = x @ weight.T + bias
```

The cuBLAS GEMM kernel that runs on the GPU has a bias-add variant built in, and that's the kernel `aten::addmm` picks. The add never appears as a separate kernel because it is **part of the matmul kernel's writeback**, which is exactly what an epilogue is.

This is the moment to notice something subtle. The kernel you saw in [Part 1 under `--compile`](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler#did-we-fuse-the-matmul-and-add-kernels-into-one) (`addmm`) is the kernel that eager `nn.Linear` already uses. There is nothing left for `torch.compile` to fuse here, which is the next thing we will verify.

### Can --compile help a single Linear?

Let's compile the forward call and look at the profiler trace.

```bash
uv run 02_linear.py --batch 1024 --in_dim 32 --out_dim 64 --compile
uvx trace-util traces -b traces

> ```

Reviewer: Don't we show the compiled profile trace?

Reviewer: Ah, it's down there. Perhaps we could make a comment that it's shown later.

### Where did the transpose go? Kernel layouts and pre-ops

A careful reader of the two traces (eager vs compile) will notice that the eager CPU dispatch chain has more in it than the compiled one.

| ![Eager CPU dispatch chain with the aten::t transpose and aten::addmm boxed separately under aten::linear](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/eager.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 4: Eager dispatch chain where `aten::linear` walks through `aten::t` (transpose) and then `aten::addmm` |

| ![Compiled CPU dispatch chain showing a Torch-Compiled Region and a single aten::addmm call, with no transpose op](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/compile.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 5: Compiled dispatch chain where `aten::addmm` is called directly, with no transpose |

The eager CPU dispatch chain inside `aten::linear` is `aten::t` followed by `aten::addmm` (Figure 4). `aten::t` does not allocate a new tensor or copy any data and it produces a *view* with rewritten strides.

> [!NOTE]

> > For folks wondering what `view` and `strides` have to do with tensors, tensors are stored contiguously in memory, and they are indexed with strides and offsets. This metadata is what lets each tensor be viewed and indexed differently.

Reviewer: yeah, again an example could be helpful. Some quick notes just for illustration; if we add something it should probably be more concise.

```
>>> import torch
>>> M = torch.tensor([[0, 1],
...                   [2, 3],
...                   [4, 5]])
>>> M
tensor([[0, 1],
        [2, 3],
        [4, 5]])
>>> print(M.shape)
torch.Size([3, 2])
>>> print(M.stride())
(2, 1)
>>> print(M.flatten())
tensor([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
>>> T = M.t()
>>> T
tensor([[0, 2, 4],
        [1, 3, 5]])
>>> print(T.shape)
torch.Size([2, 3])
>>> print(T.stride())
(1, 2)
>>> T.flatten()
tensor([0, 2, 4, 1, 3, 5])
>>> U = torch.tensor([[0, 2, 4],
...                   [1, 3, 5]])
>>> U.stride()
(3, 1)
>>> U.flatten()
tensor([0, 2, 4, 1, 3, 5])
```

The first element of the transposed tensor `T` is `0`. To go to the next one (`2`) then it makes sense to use stride 2. Similarly, item `1` is the first element of the second row of the transposed tensor. Therefore, the stride from the row starting at `0` to the row starting at `1` is indeed 1.

So with the same raw data we can represent multiple matices.

As we can see in Figure 5, compile did not remove a GPU kernel: it removed the *CPU overhead* of dispatching that view. Inductor traced through the view chain at compile time, computed the resulting strides once, and emitted a direct `aten::addmm` call with those strides hard-coded. A few microseconds of CPU work disappear while the GPU does identical math.

If you look at the GPU lane in both traces, there is exactly one kernel per forward, and it is the *same* kernel both times:

```
cutlass_80_wmma_tensorop_bf16_s161616gemm_bf16_32x32_32x1_tn_align8
```

If no transpose kernel ran, who taught the GEMM to read the weight matrix in transposed order? The answer is in the kernel's name. Look at the suffix:

```
cutlass_80_wmma_tensorop_bf16_s161616gemm_bf16_32x32_32x1_tn_align8
                                                          ^^
```

> That `tn` is the layout descriptor. cuBLAS and CUTLASS precompile a *separate kernel binary* for each combination of input layouts.

Reviewer: So `tn` means that the first matrix is transposed but the second one isn't?

Author: You are right!

`N` (non-transposed) and `T` (transposed) describe how a kernel walks its input during the inner loop. The dispatcher's job is to look at the input strides, decide which suffix combination matches, and pick the right precompiled kernel.

> [!TIP]
> The kernel name in a profiler trace is a hash dump of the kernel's identity. If two runs show the same kernel name, the GPU is doing the same work. If they differ (`_tn_` vs `_nn_`, `bf16` vs `fp16`, or `s16816gemm` vs `s161616gemm`) then the GPU is doing different work, and the dispatcher took a different branch. Learning to read this name is one of the most useful habits when comparing traces.

## Stacking three Linears: the MLP

> In this section, we will profile a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) which, as the name suggests. To make this more interesting, we will profile a feed-forward network with the GeGLU activation variant. This is also our way of paying tribute to one of the greatest lines ever written in the history of deep learning research (Figure 6).

Reviewer: > which, as the name suggests.

^ Incomplete sentence.

---
title: "Profiling in PyTorch (Part 2): From nn.Linear to a Fused MLP"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-mlp-fusion/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: ariG23498
  - user: ror
---

# Profiling in PyTorch (Part 2): From nn.Linear to a Fused MLP

![Thumbnail of the blog post](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/thumbnail.png)

In the [first part of this series "Profiling in PyTorch"](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler), we used `torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)` to learn how to read PyTorch profiler traces. We talked about the CPU dispatch chain, launch overhead, the difference between an overhead-bound and a compute-bound regime, and the internals of `torch.compile`.

> In the current part (this blog post), we climb one rung up the ladder. We replace the hand-written matmul-add pair with an `nn.Linear` (with `bias=True`). This is the building block every deep learning model uses. We then stack three of them, with an activation in between, to form a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) block.

Reviewer 2: I'd try to make it even clearer (explicit) if a reader needs to read the previous blog or not.

```suggestion
In the [first part of this series "Profiling in PyTorch"](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler), we used `torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)` to learn how to read PyTorch profiler traces. We talked about the CPU dispatch chain, launch overhead, the difference between an overhead-bound and a compute-bound regime, and the internals of `torch.compile`.

In the second iteration (this blog post), we climb one rung up the ladder. We replace the hand-written matmul-add pair with an `nn.Linear` (with `bias=True`). This is the building block every deep learning model uses. We then stack three of them, with an activation in between, to form a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) block.
```

### Where did the transpose go? Kernel layouts and pre-ops

A careful reader of the two traces (eager vs compile) will notice that the eager CPU dispatch chain has more in it than the compiled one.

| ![Eager CPU dispatch chain with the aten::t transpose and aten::addmm boxed separately under aten::linear](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/eager.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 4: Eager dispatch chain where `aten::linear` walks through `aten::t` (transpose) and then `aten::addmm` |

| ![Compiled CPU dispatch chain showing a Torch-Compiled Region and a single aten::addmm call, with no transpose op](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/compile.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 5: Compiled dispatch chain where `aten::addmm` is called directly, with no transpose |

The eager CPU dispatch chain inside `aten::linear` is `aten::t` followed by `aten::addmm` (Figure 4). `aten::t` does not allocate a new tensor or copy any data and it produces a *view* with rewritten strides.

> [!NOTE]

> > For folks wondering what `view` and `strides` have to do with tensors, tensors are stored contiguously in memory, and they are indexed with strides and offsets. This is a metadata that each tensor has to be viewed and worked with differently.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> For folks wondering what `view` and `strides` have to do with tensors, tensors are stored contiguously in memory, and they are indexed with strides and offsets. This metadata is what lets each tensor be viewed and indexed differently.
```

As we can see in Figure 5, compile did not remove a GPU kernel: it removed the *CPU overhead* of dispatching that view. Inductor traced through the view chain at compile time, computed the resulting strides once, and emitted a direct `aten::addmm` call with those strides hard-coded. A few microseconds of CPU work disappear while the GPU does identical math.

If you look at the GPU lane in both traces, there is exactly one kernel per forward, and it is the *same* kernel both times:

```
cutlass_80_wmma_tensorop_bf16_s161616gemm_bf16_32x32_32x1_tn_align8
```

> > If no transpose kernel ran, who taught the GEMM to read the weight matrix in transposed order? The answer is in the kernel's name. Look at the suffix:

Reviewer 2: is`>` correct? 
```suggestion
If no transpose kernel ran, who taught the GEMM to read the weight matrix in transposed order? The answer is in the kernel's name. Look at the suffix:
```

### The fused Triton kernel

| ![Compiled MLP trace with the triton_poi_fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul_0 kernel boxed on the CPU lane, replacing the separate gelu and mul kernels from the eager run](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/fused.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 10: The fused Triton kernel |

This is the headline of the whole compile lesson. The two eager pointwise kernels (GeLU and mul) plus a reshape collapsed into one kernel, `triton_poi_fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul_0` (Figure 10). Let's decode the name:

* `triton`: generated by Inductor's Triton backend (not cuBLAS, not ATen).
* `poi`: pointwise (Inductor tags pointwise kernels `poi`, reductions `red`, and persistent reductions `per`).
* `fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul`: the ops it merged: the `_unsafe_view` (reshape), the GeLU, and the mul.
* `0`: the unique id within the graph.

> Why is this a win? In eager mode, the intermediate `h = gelu(g)` is a full `[8192, 3072]` bf16 tensor (around 50 MB) that the GeLU kernel writes to HBM and the mul kernel immediately reads back. Fusion keeps it in registers (memory that reside inside the chip). The Triton kernel reads `g` and `u` once, computes `gelu(g) * u`, and writes the result once. One whole round trip of the intermediate through global memory is gone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Why is this a win? In eager mode, the intermediate `h = gelu(g)` is a full `[8192, 3072]` bf16 tensor (around 50 MB) that the GeLU kernel writes to HBM and the mul kernel immediately reads back. Fusion keeps it in registers (memory that resides inside the chip). The Triton kernel reads `g` and `u` once, computes `gelu(g) * u`, and writes the result once. One whole round trip of the intermediate through global memory is gone.
```

| ![Current Selection panel for a cudaLaunchKernel slice showing cbid 211, the CUDA runtime API used to launch a cuBLAS GEMM](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/gemm-cbid.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 11: A cuBLAS GEMM launches through the CUDA runtime (`cudaLaunchKernel`, `cbid 211`) |

| ![Current Selection panel for a cuLaunchKernel slice from the fused Triton kernel showing cbid 307, the CUDA driver API](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/triton-cbid.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 12: The Triton kernel launches through the CUDA driver (`cuLaunchKernel`, `cbid 307`) |

Note that the Triton kernel launches through a different API. cuBLAS GEMMs go through the CUDA runtime (`cudaLaunchKernel`, `cbid 211`, Figure 11), while the Triton kernel goes through the CUDA driver (`cuLaunchKernel`, `cbid 307`, Figure 12). This is because Triton loads its compiled cubin (CUDA Binary) as a module and launches it through the driver.

## Let's use hand tuned kernels

> So far we have let PyTorch (eager) and the compiler (`torch.compile`) pick our kernels. Now we plug in a kernel that a human expert wrote and tuned by hand. We use the `LigerGEGLUMLP` layer, but instead of installing the [Liger library](https://github.com/linkedin/Liger-Kernel) and importing it, we fetch it from the [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels) with the `kernels` library.

Reviewer 2: The liger kernels library was never introduced, so we could maybe add some more details about what's that.

Author: I don't really want the reader to think that much about the library, but know that we (huggingface `kernels`) do it.

```python
from kernels import get_kernel

kernels_layers = get_kernel("kernels-community/liger-kernels", version=1).layers
kernels_geglu_mlp = kernels_layers.LigerGEGLUMLP(Config()).to(device, dtype=torch.bfloat16).eval()
```

The full script is here: [`03_kernels_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_kernels_mlp.py).

```bash
uv run 03_kernels_mlp.py --batch 64 --seq 128 --dim 768 --hidden 3072
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

| ![Profiler trace of the LigerGEGLUMLP forward pass showing three aten::linear groups and a single LigerGELUMulFunction group on the CPU lane](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/kernels-profile.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 13: The profiler trace for the `LigerGEGLUMLP` layer |

Figure 13 shows the profile for the `LigerGEGLUMLP` layer using the Liger kernels from the Hub.

> ### Why use the kernels library

Reviewer 2: maybe a nice opportunity to link some kernels resources here like the github repo (https://github.com/huggingface/kernels), hf org or some blog that you think extends the explanation here for people looking for more.

---
title: "Profiling in PyTorch (Part 2): From nn.Linear to a Fused MLP"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-mlp-fusion/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: ariG23498
---

# Profiling in PyTorch (Part 2): From nn.Linear to a Fused MLP

![Thumbnail of the blog post](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/thumbnail.png)

In the [first part of this series "Profiling in PyTorch"](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler), we used `torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)` to learn how to read PyTorch profiler traces. We talked about the CPU dispatch chain, launch overhead, the difference between an overhead-bound and a compute-bound regime, and the internals of `torch.compile`.

> In the current part (this blog post), we climb one rung up the ladder. We replace the hand-written matmul-add pair with an `nn.Linear` (with `bias=True`). This is the building block every deep learning model uses. We then stack three of them, with an activation in between, to form the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) block.

Reviewer 3: `to form the Multilayer` -> `to form a Multilayer` maybe

> [!NOTE]

> > The scripts for this blog post live here: [`02_linear.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/02_linear.py), [`03_simple_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_simple_mlp.py), and [`03_kernels_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_kernels_mlp.py). Like before, it helps to open them in a separate tab and walk through the code as you read. We use the `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts.

Reviewer 3: Great assistance for the reader! Maybe we can plug in something on how you can access such machine easily with HF?

Author: > Maybe we can plug in something on how you can access such machine easily with HF?

Do you mean with spaces (with the accelerator) and dev mode?

Reviewer 3: Yes, or inference endpoints?

Author: I don't think inference endpoints would be a good point to add here as they are more directed towards inference and deploying your own model.

I might add two things here though:
1. Dev mode with spaces
2. Jobs that build the artefacts and one can view it (this might need some work, but good thing to showcase I think)

Reviewer 3: Yes I see your point. Maybe we can have "Dev mode with spaces" and when 2. is built you can add it to the post?

Author: I have instead added both in the note with the URLs to the docs.

```bash
uv run 02_linear.py --batch 1024 --in_dim 32 --out_dim 64
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

| ![PyTorch profiler trace of an nn.Linear forward pass: three short Profile Steps and linear_fwd annotations on the CPU lane, a tiny kernel on the GPU lane, and a long cudaDeviceSynchronize bar at the end](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/linear-profile-trace.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 1: Profiler trace of `nn.Linear` |

Figure 1 shows the profiler trace of a forward call of the linear layer. We trace the `forward` call of the linear layer with a similar `schedule` setup as the previous traces, with `wait=1`, `warmup=1` and `active=3`. This is why we see three Profile Steps in the CPU and GPU lanes.

### What is the transpose doing?

| ![Zoomed in CPU dispatch chain showing the aten::t transpose op nested before aten::addmm inside aten::linear, with no matching activity on the GPU lane](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/transpose-cpu-dispatch.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 2: The transpose CPU row |

> If we zoom into the profiler trace, as we do in Figure 2, we notice an `aten::t` op before the `aten::addmm` op. We can already figure out that `nn.Linear` transposes the weight parameter and then multiplies it with the input. This is the reason we see an `aten::t` op.

Reviewer 3: Here, we could specify that `aten::t` is the transpose operation and `aten::addm` is a muladd before `We can already figure out that...`

> An important thing to notice is that `aten::t` only rewrites tensor metadata (shape and stride) on the CPU; it does not launch a kernel on the GPU. One can verify this two ways: by looking at the GPU lane in the trace, or by checking the `aten::t` row in the profiler table and the time it took on CUDA.

Reviewer 3: A reader could be left hanging on this paragraph: yes, `aten::t` does not launch a kernel, but then where did that operation go? Perhaps the paragraph can end on that very question, and we can transition to the next paragraph.

Author: > but then where did that operation go

This question comes in later when we use compile. Here I am trying to point out to the reader that not all CPU dispatches necessarily launch a kernel, some are just metadata ops.

Reviewer 3: Ok, understood! Makes sense when I re-read the paragraph with this in mind. Maybe it would make it more explicit to point that out in the blog then, but feel free to ignore.

> ### Why does eager already look fused?

Reviewer 3: I don't think "fused" is defined anywhere before, which would probably be a good idea. Also adds to my point above: you know `aten::t` is missing because it is fused in `addm` but the reader does not

Author: > I don't think "fused" is defined anywhere before

Great catch, I will add something in the beginning.

> Also adds to my point above: you know aten::t is missing because it is fused in addm but the reader does not

In Figure 3, I still show the eager traces which has the `aten::t` visible. I delegate this question later when I compile and show that there is no `aten::t` anymore. What do you think?

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think the `aten::t` is ok right now.

| ![Profiler trace of the linear layer with the dispatch chain highlighted, showing aten::linear, aten::t and aten::addmm but no separate aten::add op](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/no-aten-add.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 3: No `aten::add` in the profile of a linear layer |

> There is no `aten::add` (the bias addition) in the dispatch chain of the linear layer, as seen in Figure 3. The bias has already been folded into the matrix multiply. Let's understand why, because this is the cleanest possible example of a **GEMM epilogue**.

Reviewer 3: Maybe, to stay in the there of "missing" kernels, we can write: `There is also no` at the beginning of the paragraph

> There is no `aten::add` (the bias addition) in the dispatch chain of the linear layer, as seen in Figure 3. The bias has already been folded into the matrix multiply. Let's understand why, because this is the cleanest possible example of a **GEMM epilogue**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is no `aten::add` (the bias addition) in the dispatch chain of the linear layer, as seen in Figure 3. This is because the bias addition has been folded into the matrix multiplication kernel, using what is called an **epilogue**.
```

Reviewer 3: Idea for a re-write, feel free to ignore

> An **epilogue** is a small computation that a GEMM (matrix multiply) kernel does at the very end, just before it writes its result back to HBM (the GPU's main memory). Adding a bias, applying an activation, or scaling by a constant are all classic epilogues. The point of an epilogue is to avoid touching HBM a second time, since memory traffic makes an operation expensive.

Reviewer 3: `GEMM` and `HBM`: more readable to define what the acronyms mean before using them

> An **epilogue** is a small computation that a GEMM (matrix multiply) kernel does at the very end, just before it writes its result back to HBM (the GPU's main memory). Adding a bias, applying an activation, or scaling by a constant are all classic epilogues. The point of an epilogue is to avoid touching HBM a second time, since memory traffic makes an operation expensive.

Reviewer 3: `touching HBM` -> `loading or writing to HBM`  ?

`nn.Linear` calls `torch.nn.functional.linear`, which in turn calls `aten::linear`. `aten::linear` looks at the inputs, notices that a bias was passed, and dispatches `aten::addmm(bias, x, weight)` instead of doing a matmul and an add separately. `addmm` computes:

```

> out = α * (x @ weight) + β * bias

Reviewer 3: Since `α` and `β` are always 1, maybe we can leave them out of this

> out = α * (x @ weight) + β * bias

Reviewer 3: \+ what about the transposition? Is it not taken care of it here?

Author: Great catch, I will add it in.

```

with `α = β = 1`. The cuBLAS GEMM kernel that runs on the GPU has a bias-add variant built in, and that's the kernel `aten::addmm` picks. The add never appears as a separate kernel because it is **part of the matmul kernel's writeback**, which is exactly what an epilogue is.

This is the moment to notice something subtle. The kernel you saw in [Part 1 under `--compile`](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler#did-we-fuse-the-matmul-and-add-kernels-into-one) (`addmm`) is the kernel that eager `nn.Linear` already uses. There is nothing left for `torch.compile` to fuse here, which is the next thing we will verify.

> ### Why does `--compile` not help a single Linear?

Reviewer 3: Instead of "Why does `--compile` not help a single Linear?" maybe switch to "Can `--compile` help a single Linear?" so that the question is asked to the reader and then we answer it, instead of presenting this fact and then proving it. Maybe I am nitpicking here.

Let's compile the forward call and look at the profiler trace.

```bash
uv run 02_linear.py --batch 1024 --in_dim 32 --out_dim 64 --compile
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

If you compare the eager and compiled traces for a single `nn.Linear`'s `forward`, you will find:

- The same cuBLAS GEMM kernel on the GPU.
- The same `aten::addmm` op on the CPU.
- A few extra rows on the CPU lane unique to compile.

> This is worth internalizing. A common reflex is to reach for `torch.compile` whenever a model feels slow. For a single GEMM-with-bias, compile has nothing to do. The wins start to appear only when there are several operators that can be rearranged into fewer kernels, which is the story of the [MLP block later in this post](#stacking-two-linears-the-mlp).

Reviewer 3: I am not sure about this paragraph, because compile can add cuda graphs without fusing (which is beneficial) and the case of appyling compile to a single layer rarely happen. Maybe phrase it more as: this is not a bug, this is just that compile needs more than one operation to do fusing, and let's prove that by looking at the MLP?

### Where did the transpose go? Kernel layouts and pre-ops

A careful reader of the two traces (eager vs compile) will notice that the eager CPU dispatch chain has more in it than the compiled one.

| ![Eager CPU dispatch chain with the aten::t transpose and aten::addmm boxed separately under aten::linear](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/eager.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 4: Eager dispatch chain where `aten::linear` walks through `aten::t` (transpose) and then `aten::addmm` |

| ![Compiled CPU dispatch chain showing a Torch-Compiled Region and a single aten::addmm call, with no transpose op](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/compile.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 5: Compiled dispatch chain where `aten::addmm` is called directly, with no transpose |

> The eager CPU dispatch chain inside `aten::linear` is `aten::t` followed by `aten::addmm` (Figure 4). `aten::t` does not allocate a new tensor or copy any data and it produces a *view* with rewritten strides.

Reviewer 3: Both `view` and `strides` are non-trivial terms that probably need to be defined.

Author: Added a small section just below, does that read better now?

Reviewer 3: I don't see it!

> What compile removed (Figure 5), then, is **the CPU dispatch overhead of that view bookkeeping**, not a GPU kernel. Inductor traced through the view chain at compile time, computed the resulting strides once, and emitted a direct `aten::addmm` call with those strides hard-coded. A few microseconds of CPU work disappear while the GPU does identical math.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As we can see in Figure 5, compile did not remove a GPU kernel: it removed the *CPU overhead* of dispatching that view. Inductor traced through the view chain at compile time, computed the resulting strides once, and emitted a direct `aten::addmm` call with those strides hard-coded. A few microseconds of CPU work disappear while the GPU does identical math.

Author: Was the triple ticks ("```") at the end intentional?

Reviewer 3: No! Removed.

If you look at the GPU lane in both traces, there is exactly one kernel per forward, and it is the *same* kernel both times:

```
cutlass_80_wmma_tensorop_bf16_s161616gemm_bf16_32x32_32x1_tn_align8
```

> If no transpose kernel ran, who taught the GEMM to read the weight matrix in transposed order? The answer is in the kernel's name. Look at the suffix:

```
cutlass_80_wmma_tensorop_bf16_s161616gemm_bf16_32x32_32x1_tn_align8
                                                          ^^
```

That `tn` is the layout descriptor. cuBLAS and CUTLASS precompile a *separate kernel binary* for each combination of input layouts:

> | Suffix | A layout | B layout | When you see it |

Reviewer 3: Maybe the table is a bit much ! The "n" and "t" explanation is enough imo

Author: I think you are right. Will update in the latest commit.

| `gelu` | `aten::gelu`| `vectorized_elementwise_kernel<4, GeluCUDAKernelImpl...>` | cudaLaunchKernel |
| `h * u` | `aten::mul` | `vectorized_elementwise_kernel<4, ...MulFunctor...>` | cudaLaunchKernel |
| `down_proj` | `aten::linear` | `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_bf16_128x256_...` | occupancy query + cudaLaunchKernel |

The three GEMMs each do an extra `cudaOccupancyMaxActiveBlocksPerMultiprocessor` call before the launch. We have a separate section on this in Part 1, [you can find it here](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler#why-does-matmul-have-an-extra-cuda-runtime-call). That is cuBLAS sizing the grid. The pointwise ops (GeLU and mul) launch directly, with no occupancy query. So "a linear" is actually query + launch, while "a pointwise op" is just launch.

| ![Profiler table for the GeGLU MLP listing op names and their CUDA times, where metadata ops like aten::transpose and aten::as_strided show 0.000us of CUDA time](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-table.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 8: The table shows that some ops launch zero kernels |

> The `aten::t`, `aten::transpose`, `aten::reshape`, `aten::view`, `aten::as_strided`, and `aten::_unsafe_view` ops launch zero kernels. They show `0.000us` of CUDA time in the table (Figure 8) because they only rewrite tensor metadata (shape and stride) on the CPU. A reader scanning the table sees around six op names per linear, but only one of them (`mm`) ever reaches the GPU. The lesson is worth noting that not every `aten::` row is a kernel.

Reviewer 3: > The lesson is worth noting that not every `aten::` row is a kernel

Seems redundant because you already made that point with `aten::t`:

### What happens with `torch.compile`?

Before compiling the `forward` method and visualizing it, let's do the mental exercise again of asking ourselves what we expect to see in the trace. This is a fun experiment, and an important one to repeat every time you profile something yourself. Always build on your intuition, and the moment something does not match, stop and figure out why.

```bash
uv run 03_simple_mlp.py --batch 64 --seq 128 --dim 768 --hidden 3072 --compile
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

| ![Profiler trace of the compiled GeGLU MLP showing three aten::mm calls and one fused triton kernel on the CPU lane, labelled mm, mm, fused, mm](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-compile-trace.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 9: The profiler trace for the compiled GeGLU MLP |

In eager mode, each `nn.Linear` was expanded into a chain of dispatcher ops (`aten::linear` → `aten::t` → `aten::transpose` → `aten::matmul` → `aten::reshape` → `aten::mm`). Those are the high-level wrappers that ATen walks through before reaching the real GEMM. `torch.compile` removes that chain.

> The compile pipeline is:

Reviewer 3: Each of these points seems very interesting to be honest, but they all use undefined terms: FX, AOT, lower the graph... I don't think we need to deep dive into each concept, but a short sentence explaining in layman's terms what the step is would be cool.

### The fused Triton kernel

| ![Compiled MLP trace with the triton_poi_fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul_0 kernel boxed on the CPU lane, replacing the separate gelu and mul kernels from the eager run](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/fused.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 10: The fused Triton kernel |

This is the headline of the whole compile lesson. The two eager pointwise kernels (GeLU and mul) plus a reshape collapsed into one kernel, `triton_poi_fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul_0` (Figure 10). Let's decode the name:

* `triton`: generated by Inductor's Triton backend (not cuBLAS, not ATen).
* `poi`: pointwise (Inductor tags pointwise kernels `poi`, reductions `red`, and persistent reductions `per`).
* `fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul`: the ops it merged: the `_unsafe_view` (reshape), the GeLU, and the mul.
* `0`: the unique id within the graph.

> Why is this a win? In eager mode, the intermediate `h = gelu(g)` is a full `[8192, 3072]` bf16 tensor (around 50 MB) that the GeLU kernel writes to HBM and the mul kernel immediately reads back. Fusion keeps it in registers. The Triton kernel reads `g` and `u` once, computes `gelu(g) * u`, and writes the result once. One whole round trip of the intermediate through global memory is gone.

Reviewer 3: Should we remind the reader of what is a `registers` ?

Author: In my mind registers are memory inside the chip, would that be enough?

Reviewer 3: Yes! And that they are closer than the HBM maybe

| ![Current Selection panel for a cudaLaunchKernel slice showing cbid 211, the CUDA runtime API used to launch a cuBLAS GEMM](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/gemm-cbid.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 11: A cuBLAS GEMM launches through the CUDA runtime (`cudaLaunchKernel`, `cbid 211`) |

| ![Current Selection panel for a cuLaunchKernel slice from the fused Triton kernel showing cbid 307, the CUDA driver API](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/triton-cbid.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 12: The Triton kernel launches through the CUDA driver (`cuLaunchKernel`, `cbid 307`) |

> Note that the Triton kernel launches through a different API. cuBLAS GEMMs go through the CUDA runtime (`cudaLaunchKernel`, `cbid 211`, Figure 11), while the Triton kernel goes through the CUDA driver (`cuLaunchKernel`, `cbid 307`, Figure 12). This is because Triton loads its compiled cubin (CUDA Binary) as a module and launches it through the driver.

Reviewer 3: Idk if this is needed, as it leads to nowhere (might be mistaken, havent read it all yet)

Author: It does lead to nothing 🤣 

It was an interesting tid-bit that I thought was worth mentioning. Do you think I should fold it into a `Note`?

Reviewer 3: Idk! It's more trivia in my opinion, if it had any practical implication I would add it as a NOTE. Is there a practical implication of this?

Author: I see your point, I would rather remove an un-necessary information than to add it and confuse the reader.

| :--: |
| Figure 15: The Liger kernel has no pre-ops — the box where they would be is empty |

1. **The fusion is baked in.** The [`LigerGEGLUMLP`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/layers.py#L292) forward is `down_proj(LigerGELUMulFunction.apply(gate_proj(x), up_proj(x)))`. The [`LigerGELUMulFunction`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/geglu.py#L130) runs a single Triton kernel, [`_geglu_tanh_forward_kernel`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/geglu.py#L97), that computes `gelu(gate) * up` in one pass. This is exactly what we saw from `torch.compile`, where the intermediate never makes a round-trip through HBM. We get it here **without the compiler**, as shown in Figures 14 and 15 (no Dynamo guards, no compile latency, no recompilation risk).

2. **The launch parameters were chosen for the hardware.** The kernel does not guess its block size at random. Liger's [`calculate_settings`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/geglu.py#L95) picks them from the column count.

> It is worth being honest about what "tuned" does **not** mean. It does not mean "always the fastest for your exact shape". The fused kernel here runs in **92.8 µs**, while Inductor's fused kernel from the compile run was **89.4 µs**. The tuning heuristic is a good general rule (next power of two, capped warps), not an exhaustive per-shape search.

Reviewer 3: Maybe Liger isnt the best example then... I have noticed their kernels can lead to slowdowns on many / most shapes.

Author: I was under the same impression, but I feel there is not much I could do with this topic. The bits that I wanted the reader to explore was what `kernels` are and how to use them. It would be too difficult for me to cherry pick a kernel and showcase its use only for an MLP.

What do you think?

Reviewer 3: It's just that you want to introduce tuned kernels, but then it looks like they are worse than inductor, which muddies the waters a bit. 
In practice, a tuned kernel can be much better than inductor, at least that was true ~1 year ago. 
If you have a simple example of a kernel working better than inductor, I think it would illustrate your point better, and we can always make a note that the tuned kernel may not always be better.

Reviewer 4: Yeah perhaps better to trim down the section or just make a note that there maybe hand-tuned kernels performing better what torch compile did.

```
out = x @ weight.T + bias
```

The cuBLAS GEMM kernel that runs on the GPU has a bias-add variant built in, and that's the kernel `aten::addmm` picks. The add never appears as a separate kernel because it is **part of the matmul kernel's writeback**, which is exactly what an epilogue is.

This is the moment to notice something subtle. The kernel you saw in [Part 1 under `--compile`](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler#did-we-fuse-the-matmul-and-add-kernels-into-one) (`addmm`) is the kernel that eager `nn.Linear` already uses. There is nothing left for `torch.compile` to fuse here, which is the next thing we will verify.

### Can --compile help a single Linear?

Let's compile the forward call and look at the profiler trace.

```bash
uv run 02_linear.py --batch 1024 --in_dim 32 --out_dim 64 --compile
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

If you compare the eager and compiled traces for a single `nn.Linear`'s `forward`, you will find:

- The same cuBLAS GEMM kernel on the GPU.
- The same `aten::addmm` op on the CPU.
- A few extra rows on the CPU lane unique to compile.

> This is worth internalizing. A common reflex is to reach for `torch.compile` whenever a model feels slow. For a single GEMM-with-bias, compile has very little to do. This is not a bug, this is just that compile needs more than one operation to do fusing, and let's prove that by [looking at the MLP](#stacking-two-linears-the-mlp).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is worth internalizing. A common reflex is to reach for `torch.compile` whenever a model feels slow. For a single GEMM-with-bias, compile has very little to do. This is not a bug, this is just that compile needs more than one operation to do fusing. Let's prove that by [looking at the MLP](#stacking-two-linears-the-mlp).
```

| Suffix | A layout | B layout | When you see it |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| `nn` | non-transposed | non-transposed | Both inputs read in their stored order |
| `nt` | non-transposed | transposed | B is consumed in transposed order |
| `tn` | transposed | non-transposed | A is consumed in transposed order (this is what we see for `nn.Linear`) |
| `tt` | transposed | transposed | Both inputs consumed transposed |

`N` (non-transposed) and `T` (transposed) describe how a kernel walks its input during the inner loop. The dispatcher's job is to look at the input strides, decide which suffix combination matches, and pick the right precompiled kernel.

> [!TIP]
> The kernel name in a profiler trace is a hash dump of the kernel's identity. If two runs show the same kernel name, the GPU is doing the same work. If they differ (`_tn_` vs `_nn_`, `bf16` vs `fp16`, or `s16816gemm` vs `s161616gemm`) then the GPU is doing different work, and the dispatcher took a different branch. Learning to read this name is one of the most useful habits when comparing traces.

## Stacking three Linears: the MLP

> In this section, we will profile a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) which, as the name suggests, is a stack of multiple linear layers with some activations in between. To make this more interesting, we will profile a feed-forward network with the GeGLU activation variant. This is also our way of paying tribute to one of the greatest lines ever written in the history of deep learning research (Figure 6).

Reviewer 2: somebody making it this far in the blog would know what an mlp is, no?

```suggestion
In this section, we will profile a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) which, as the name suggests. To make this more interesting, we will profile a feed-forward network with the GeGLU activation variant. This is also our way of paying tribute to one of the greatest lines ever written in the history of deep learning research (Figure 6).
```

| ![Conclusions section of the GLU Variants Improve Transformer paper, with the closing sentence attributing the architectures' success to divine benevolence highlighted](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/geglu-paper.png) |
| :--: |

> | Figure 6: The conclusion section of the [GLU Variants Improve Transformer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202) paper.|

Reviewer 2: 😭

Reviewer: Lol I had forgotten this, nice 😂

Reviewer 4: If it comes from Noam Shazeer, math doesn't need to be explained. Simple. Don't complicate it further.

> [!NOTE]
> If you want to learn more about tiling in depth, [here is a great resource](https://alvinwan.com/how-to-tile-matrix-multiplication/) to get started with.

This is exactly why the table had two GEMM rows: the `128x128` row is gate+up and the `128x256` row is down.

### What happens with `torch.compile`?

Before compiling the `forward` method and visualizing it, let's do the mental exercise again of asking ourselves what we expect to see in the trace. This is a fun experiment, and an important one to repeat every time you profile something yourself. Always build on your intuition, and the moment something does not match, stop and figure out why.

```bash
uv run 03_simple_mlp.py --batch 64 --seq 128 --dim 768 --hidden 3072 --compile
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

| ![Profiler trace of the compiled GeGLU MLP showing three aten::mm calls and one fused triton kernel on the CPU lane, labelled mm, mm, fused, mm](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-compile-trace.png) |
| :--: |

> | Figure 9: The profiler trace for the compiled GeGLU MLP |

Reviewer 2: Is there a rendering problem here? 

<img width="1040" height="283" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/52ecb03f-0608-4dfb-8915-c81f9f81aa92" />

Author: I think so, as the [image](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-compile-trace.png) renders properly.

---
title: "Profiling in PyTorch (Part 2): From nn.Linear to a Fused MLP"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/torch-mlp-fusion/thumbnail.png
authors:
  - user: ariG23498
  - user: ror
---

# Profiling in PyTorch (Part 2): From nn.Linear to a Fused MLP

![Thumbnail of the blog post](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/thumbnail.png)

> In the [first part of this series "Profiling in PyTorch"](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler), we used `torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)` to learn how to read PyTorch profiler traces. We talked about the CPU dispatch chain, launch overhead, the difference between an overhead-bound and a compute-bound regime, and the internals of `torch.compile`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In the [first part of this series "Profiling in PyTorch"](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler), we used `torch.add(torch.matmul(x, w), b)` to learn how to read PyTorch profiler traces. We also discussed several other topics that came our way -- the CPU dispatch chain, launch overhead, the difference between an overhead-bound and a compute-bound regime, and some internals of `torch.compile`.
```

> In the second iteration (this blog post), we climb one rung up the ladder. We replace the hand-written matmul-add pair with an `nn.Linear` (with `bias=True`). This is the building block every deep learning model uses. We then stack three of them, with an activation in between, to form a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) block.

Reviewer 4: > In the second iteration (this blog post), we climb one rung up the ladder.

I would understand if it's preferential but it feels like a filler that could be removed and be written like:

> In the second iteration (this blog post), we replace the ...

> We then stack three of them, with an activation in between, to form a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) block.

Also, why three? Why not two?

Author: GeGLUMLP has three linear layers (up, gate, down)

Reviewer 4: And that is not clear from here. A reader might be left thinking "does an MLP have to have a minimum of three linears to be an MLP"?

Author: I see what you mean, will change in the latest commit.

> [!NOTE]

> > The scripts for this blog post live here: [`02_linear.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/02_linear.py), [`03_simple_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_simple_mlp.py), and [`03_kernels_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_kernels_mlp.py). Like before, it helps to open them in a separate tab and walk through the code as you read. We use the `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts. It is really easy to setup a GPU on the Hugging Face infrastructure and experiment with the scripts using [Dev Mode with Spaces](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/spaces-dev-mode). One could also run the scripts with the [Hugging Face Jobs pipeline](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/en/guides/jobs).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> The scripts for this blog post live here: [`02_linear.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/02_linear.py), [`03_simple_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_simple_mlp.py), and [`03_kernels_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_kernels_mlp.py). Like before, it helps to open them in a separate tab and walk through the code as you read. We use an `NVIDIA A100-SXM4-80GB` GPU to run the scripts. It is really easy to set up a GPU on the Hugging Face infrastructure and experiment with the scripts using [Dev Mode with Spaces](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/spaces-dev-mode). One could also run the scripts with the [Hugging Face Jobs pipeline](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/en/guides/jobs).
```

Before we begin, a quick recap of two ideas we will lean on repeatedly:

1. A GPU **kernel** is a program that runs in parallel on many threads of the GPU.

> 2. The CPU **schedules and launches** these kernels. Most of the PyTorch overhead you see in a profiler trace is this scheduling work.

Reviewer 4: 🤌

## From matmul-add to Linear

`nn.Linear` is a module wrapper around the same matrix multiplication and addition we already profiled in [Part 1](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler). The only difference is that it owns its weight and bias as parameters and exposes a `forward` method that PyTorch users have grown familiar with.

```py
# bias=True would truly emulate the multiplication and addition
# operations we have seen in part 1 of the series
linear_layer = nn.Linear(in_dim, out_dim, bias=True)
y = linear_layer(x)
```

The operation at hand can be written as:

```
y = x @ w.T + b

> ```

Reviewer 4: If we want to appear cooler, we could write it as pure Latex.

Where `x` is the input, `w` is the weight and `b` is the bias. Let's run [`02_linear.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/02_linear.py) and check the profile.

```bash
uv run 02_linear.py --batch 1024 --in_dim 32 --out_dim 64
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

> [!TIP]
> [`trace-util`](https://x.com/ariG23498/status/2054811716727517374) is a utility that will sync your traces to a [Hugging Face bucket](https://huggingface.co/storage) and then provide the [Preffeto URLs](https://perfetto.dev/) on your terminal.

> | ![PyTorch profiler trace of an nn.Linear forward pass: three short Profile Steps and linear_fwd annotations on the CPU lane, a tiny kernel on the GPU lane, and a long cudaDeviceSynchronize bar at the end](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/linear-profile-trace.png) |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| ![PyTorch profiler trace of an `nn.Linear` forward pass: three short Profile Steps and `linear_fwd` annotations on the CPU lane, a tiny kernel on the GPU lane, and a long `cudaDeviceSynchronize` bar at the end](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/linear-profile-trace.png) |
```

Reviewer 4: I wonder if that should also be written in the text below. Applies elsewhere.

| :--: |
| Figure 1: Profiler trace of `nn.Linear` |

> 

Reviewer 4: What I am finding to be confusing:

1. The tiny kernel isn't immediately visible. Perhaps we could add a marker?
2. "This is why we see three Profile Steps in the CPU and GPU lanes." -- There are only two marks on a straight line on the GPU lane.

Author: I agree that the kernels are not visible, but I would also want the reader to use the script and be able to look at the traces themselves. The problem that I have been having with screenshots are that while trying to capture something important I miss something else, which is going to be inevitible.

I hope making the `trace-util` user friendly it would encourage more people to actually open up the traces and see for themselves.

Figure 1 shows the profiler trace of a forward call of the linear layer. We trace the `forward` call of the linear layer with a similar `schedule` setup as the previous traces, with `wait=1`, `warmup=1` and `active=3`. This is why we see three Profile Steps in the CPU and GPU lanes.

### What is the transpose doing?

| ![Zoomed in CPU dispatch chain showing the aten::t transpose op nested before aten::addmm inside aten::linear, with no matching activity on the GPU lane](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/transpose-cpu-dispatch.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 2: The transpose CPU row |

If we zoom into the profiler trace, as we do in Figure 2, we notice an `aten::t` (transpose) op before the `aten::addmm` (multiplication and addition) op. We can already figure out that `nn.Linear` transposes the weight parameter and then multiplies it with the input. This is the reason we see an `aten::t` op.

> An important thing to notice is that `aten::t` does not really copy or reorganize data: it only rewrites tensor metadata (shape and stride) on the CPU to represent the transposed matrix. It does not launch a kernel on the GPU. One can verify this two ways: by looking at the GPU lane in the trace, or by checking the `aten::t` row in the profiler table and the time it took on CUDA.

Reviewer 4: Good point! I'd try to throw in the term "materialize" somewhere there but I'd also understand if we don't want to do that because we want it to ready simple.

### Why are there no separate `mul` and `add` kernels?

| ![Profiler trace of the linear layer with the dispatch chain highlighted, showing aten::linear, aten::t and aten::addmm but no separate aten::add op](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/no-aten-add.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 3: No `aten::add` in the profile of a linear layer |

> There is no `aten::add` (the bias addition) in the dispatch chain of the linear layer, as seen in Figure 3. This is because the bias addition has been folded into the matrix multiplication kernel, using what is called an **epilogue**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There is no `aten::add` (the bias addition) in the dispatch chain of the linear layer, as seen in Figure 3. This is because the bias addition has been _folded_ into the matrix multiplication kernel, using what is called an **epilogue**.
```

> An **epilogue** is a small computation that a GEMM (GEneral Matrix Multiply) kernel does at the very end, just before it writes its result back to HBM (High Bandwidth Memory, the GPU's main memory). Adding a bias, applying an activation, or scaling by a constant are all classic epilogues. The point of an epilogue is to avoid loading or writing to HBM a second time, since memory traffic makes an operation expensive.

Reviewer 4: 🔥 ouf!

Just a technical exchange here. The torch compiler can even be instructed to do aggressive epilogue fusion by specifying `epilogue_fusion=True`. 

Example:

```py
import torch._inductor.config as inductor_config

inductor_config.epilogue_fusion = True
inductor_config.benchmark_epilogue_fusion = True
```

Author: TIL! Thanks for sharing.

> `nn.Linear` calls `torch.nn.functional.linear`, which in turn calls `aten::linear`. `aten::linear` looks at the inputs, notices that a bias was passed, and dispatches `aten::addmm(bias, x, weight)` instead of doing a matmul and an add separately. `addmm` computes:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`nn.Linear` calls `torch.nn.functional.linear`, which, in turn, calls `aten::linear`. `aten::linear` looks at the inputs, notices that a bias was passed, and dispatches `aten::addmm(bias, x, weight)` instead of doing a matmul and an add separately. `addmm` computes:
```

```
out = x @ weight.T + bias
```

The cuBLAS GEMM kernel that runs on the GPU has a bias-add variant built in, and that's the kernel `aten::addmm` picks. The add never appears as a separate kernel because it is **part of the matmul kernel's writeback**, which is exactly what an epilogue is.

This is the moment to notice something subtle. The kernel you saw in [Part 1 under `--compile`](https://huggingface.co/blog/torch-profiler#did-we-fuse-the-matmul-and-add-kernels-into-one) (`addmm`) is the kernel that eager `nn.Linear` already uses. There is nothing left for `torch.compile` to fuse here, which is the next thing we will verify.

### Can --compile help a single Linear?

Let's compile the forward call and look at the profiler trace. (The profiler trace is visualized in the [next section](#where-did-the-transpose-go-kernel-layouts-and-pre-ops))

```bash
uv run 02_linear.py --batch 1024 --in_dim 32 --out_dim 64 --compile
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

> If you compare the eager and compiled traces for a single `nn.Linear`'s `forward`, you will find:

Reviewer 4: I kinda strongly feel that there should be a trace figure right above. Otherwise, the flow is broken for the reader.

- The same cuBLAS GEMM kernel on the GPU.
- The same `aten::addmm` op on the CPU.
- A few extra rows on the CPU lane unique to compile.

> This is worth internalizing. A common reflex is to reach for `torch.compile` whenever a model feels slow. For a single GEMM-with-bias, compile has very little to do. This is not a bug, this is just that compile needs more than one operation to do fusing. Let's prove that by [looking at the MLP](#stacking-two-linears-the-mlp).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is worth internalizing. A common reflex is to reach for `torch.compile` whenever a model feels slow. For a single GEMM-with-bias, compile has very little to do. This is not a bug, this is just that compile needs more than one operation to possibly do any fusing. Let's prove that by [looking at an MLP](#stacking-two-linears-the-mlp).
```

### Where did the transpose go? Kernel layouts and pre-ops

A careful reader of the two traces (eager vs compile) will notice that the eager CPU dispatch chain has more in it than the compiled one.

| ![Eager CPU dispatch chain with the aten::t transpose and aten::addmm boxed separately under aten::linear](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/eager.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 4: Eager dispatch chain where `aten::linear` walks through `aten::t` (transpose) and then `aten::addmm` |

| ![Compiled CPU dispatch chain showing a Torch-Compiled Region and a single aten::addmm call, with no transpose op](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/compile.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 5: Compiled dispatch chain where `aten::addmm` is called directly, with no transpose |

The eager CPU dispatch chain inside `aten::linear` is `aten::t` followed by `aten::addmm` (Figure 4). To understand what `aten::t` actually does, we need a quick detour into *strides* and *views*.

> A tensor stores its data as one flat, contiguous run of numbers in memory. The `shape` and `stride` are metadata that sit on top of that run and tell PyTorch how to walk it: a stride of `(s0, s1)` means "step `s0` elements to move one row, step `s1` to move one column". Change the metadata and you get a different *view* of the *same* raw data, with no copy:

Reviewer 4: It doesn't always have to be contiguous, though. Which is why PyTorch exposes methods to deal with the contiguity of tensors.

```py
>>> M = torch.tensor([[0, 1],
...                   [2, 3],
...                   [4, 5]])
>>> M.shape, M.stride()
(torch.Size([3, 2]), (2, 1))   # two steps per row, one step per column

>>> T = M.t()                  # transpose
>>> T.shape, T.stride()
(torch.Size([2, 3]), (1, 2))   # shape and stride swapped, data untouched
>>> T
tensor([[0, 2, 4],
        [1, 3, 5]])
>>> T.flatten()                # forced to materialize, so the data is reordered
tensor([0, 2, 4, 1, 3, 5])
```

`M.t()` did not move a single number. It returned a new view whose strides are swapped, so reading it row-by-row now walks the original buffer `0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5` in transposed order. The underlying data is identical; only the metadata differs.

This is exactly what `aten::t` does inside the linear layer: it does not allocate a new tensor or copy any data, it produces a *view* of the weight with rewritten strides.

> As we can see in Figure 5, compile did not remove a GPU kernel: it removed the *CPU overhead* of dispatching that view. Inductor traced through the view chain at compile time, computed the resulting strides once, and emitted a direct `aten::addmm` call with those strides hard-coded. A few microseconds of CPU work disappear while the GPU does identical math.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As we can see in Figure 5, compile did not remove a GPU kernel: it removed the *CPU overhead* of dispatching that view. Inductor traced through the view chain at compile time, computed the resulting strides once, and emitted a direct `aten::addmm` call with those strides hard-coded. A few microseconds of CPU work disappear while the GPU does identical math. 

As one would expect, when the input data violates the strides precomputed by the compiler, it will throw an error.
```

If you look at the GPU lane in both traces, there is exactly one kernel per forward, and it is the *same* kernel both times:

```
cutlass_80_wmma_tensorop_bf16_s161616gemm_bf16_32x32_32x1_tn_align8
```

If no transpose kernel ran, who taught the GEMM to read the weight matrix in transposed order? The answer is in the kernel's name. Look at the suffix:

```
cutlass_80_wmma_tensorop_bf16_s161616gemm_bf16_32x32_32x1_tn_align8
                                                          ^^
```

That `tn` is the layout descriptor. cuBLAS and CUTLASS precompile a *separate kernel binary* for each combination of input layouts.

> `N` (non-transposed) and `T` (transposed) describe how a kernel walks its input during the inner loop. The dispatcher's job is to look at the input strides, decide which suffix combination matches, and pick the right precompiled kernel.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`n` (non-transposed) and `t` (transposed) describe how a kernel walks its input during the inner loop. The dispatcher's job is to look at the input strides, decide which suffix combination matches, and pick the right precompiled kernel.
```

> [!TIP]

> > The kernel name in a profiler trace is a hash dump of the kernel's identity. If two runs show the same kernel name, the GPU is doing the same work. If they differ (`_tn_` vs `_nn_`, `bf16` vs `fp16`, or `s16816gemm` vs `s161616gemm`) then the GPU is doing different work, and the dispatcher took a different branch. Learning to read this name is one of the most useful habits when comparing traces.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> The kernel name in a profiler trace is a hash dump of the kernel's identity. If two runs show the same kernel name, the GPU is doing the same work. If they differ (e.g., `_tn_` vs `_nn_`, `bf16` vs `fp16`, or `s16816gemm` vs `s161616gemm`) then the GPU is doing different work, and the dispatcher took a different branch. Learning to read this name is one of the most useful habits when comparing traces.
```

## Stacking three Linears: the MLP

> In this section, we will profile a Multilayer Perceptron (MLP). To make this more interesting, we will profile a feed-forward network with the GeGLU activation variant. This is also our way of paying tribute to one of the greatest lines ever written in the history of deep learning research (Figure 6).

Reviewer 4: Maybe also tell that this is a component of the transformer architecture and this FC variant is quite heavily used in practice.

| :--: |
| Figure 6: The conclusion section of the [GLU Variants Improve Transformer](https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.05202) paper.|

```py
class SimpleGeGLUMLP(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, dim, hidden):
        super().__init__()
        self.gate_proj = nn.Linear(dim, hidden, bias=False)
        self.up_proj = nn.Linear(dim, hidden, bias=False)
        self.down_proj = nn.Linear(hidden, dim, bias=False)

    def forward(self, x):
        g = self.gate_proj(x)
        u = self.up_proj(x)
        h = F.gelu(g, approximate="tanh")
        m = h * u
        y = self.down_proj(m)
        return y
```

You will find the entire script here: [`03_simple_mlp.py`](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ariG23498/profiling-pytorch/blob/main/03_simple_mlp.py). Execute it like so:

```bash
uv run 03_simple_mlp.py --batch 64 --seq 128 --dim 768 --hidden 3072
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

Before we open the trace, let's think together about what we should expect to see. The `forward` function does a fair amount of computation, but most of it is already familiar to us.

> We should expect three `aten::linear` dispatches, one for each `nn.Linear` layer. We should also expect two pointwise kernel launches, one for the GeLU and one for the multiplication. Forming this expectation before looking is the single most useful habit in profiling: you read the trace to *confirm or break* a guess, not to form one from scratch.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We should expect three `aten::linear` dispatches, one for each `nn.Linear` layer. We should also expect two pointwise kernel launches, one for the GeLU and one for the multiplication. Forming this expectation before looking is the single most useful habit in the profiling journey: you read the trace to *confirm or break* a guess, not to form one from scratch.
```

I think it's a bit more inclusive. Someone that's just starting wouldn't probably be able to confirm or break a thing.

| ![Profiler table for the GeGLU MLP listing op names and their CUDA times, where metadata ops like aten::transpose and aten::as_strided show 0.000us of CUDA time](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-table.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 8: The table shows that some ops launch zero kernels |

The `aten::t`, `aten::transpose`, `aten::reshape`, `aten::view`, `aten::as_strided`, and `aten::_unsafe_view` ops launch zero kernels. They show `0.000us` of CUDA time in the table (Figure 8) because they only rewrite tensor metadata (shape and stride) on the CPU. A reader scanning the table sees around six op names per linear, but only one of them (`mm`) ever reaches the GPU.

### Why are there two types of GEMM kernels?

> The MLP flattens `[batch, seq, dim]` to `[batch*seq, dim]` for the matmul, so the `8192` below is `batch*seq = 64*128`.

Reviewer 4: Maybe lead the section with something like "We noticed that there two kernels (kernel names go here ...) in the MLP" or something like it. Reads more connected.

> The MLP flattens `[batch, seq, dim]` to `[batch*seq, dim]` for the matmul, so the `8192` below is `batch*seq = 64*128`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The MLP flattens `[batch, seq, dim]` to `[batch * seq, dim]` for the matmul, so the `8192` below is `batch * seq = 64 * 128`.
```

I am just a `ruff` formatter.

> From the trace:

Reviewer 4: Feels out of place without a line that introduces the table.

> [!NOTE]
> If you want to learn more about tiling in depth, [here is a great resource](https://alvinwan.com/how-to-tile-matrix-multiplication/) to get started with.

This is exactly why the table had two GEMM rows: the `128x128` row is gate+up and the `128x256` row is down.

### What happens with `torch.compile`?

Before compiling the `forward` method and visualizing it, let's do the mental exercise again of asking ourselves what we expect to see in the trace. This is a fun experiment, and an important one to repeat every time you profile something yourself. Always build on your intuition, and the moment something does not match, stop and figure out why.

```bash
uv run 03_simple_mlp.py --batch 64 --seq 128 --dim 768 --hidden 3072 --compile
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

| ![Profiler trace of the compiled GeGLU MLP showing three aten::mm calls and one fused triton kernel on the CPU lane, labelled mm, mm, fused, mm](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-compile-trace.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 9: The profiler trace for the compiled GeGLU MLP |

> In eager mode, each `nn.Linear` was expanded into a chain of dispatcher ops (`aten::linear` → `aten::t` → `aten::transpose` → `aten::matmul` → `aten::reshape` → `aten::mm`). Those are the high-level wrappers that ATen walks through before reaching the real GEMM. `torch.compile` removes that chain.

Reviewer 4: Would it be possible to provide comparative figure for this? 

Because in the eager trace, 

<img width="11712" height="1988" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8c5c58e5-6134-4c75-8203-8626818b01f5" />

We have three linears on the surface and in the compile trace, we have three "mm"s. So, it still feels unclear.

### The fused Triton kernel

| ![Compiled MLP trace with the triton_poi_fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul_0 kernel boxed on the CPU lane, replacing the separate gelu and mul kernels from the eager run](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/fused.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 10: The fused Triton kernel |

This is the headline of the whole compile lesson. The two eager pointwise kernels (GeLU and mul) plus a reshape collapsed into one kernel, `triton_poi_fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul_0` (Figure 10). Let's decode the name:

* `triton`: generated by Inductor's Triton backend (not cuBLAS, not ATen).
* `poi`: pointwise (Inductor tags pointwise kernels `poi`, reductions `red`, and persistent reductions `per`).
* `fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul`: the ops it merged: the `_unsafe_view` (reshape), the GeLU, and the mul.
* `0`: the unique id within the graph.

> Why is this a win? In eager mode, the intermediate `h = gelu(g)` is a full `[8192, 3072]` bf16 tensor (around 50 MB) that the GeLU kernel writes to HBM and the mul kernel immediately reads back. Fusion keeps it in registers (memory that resides inside the chip and are closer than the HBM). The Triton kernel reads `g` and `u` once, computes `gelu(g) * u`, and writes the result once. One whole round trip of the intermediate through global memory is gone.

Reviewer 4: Can we demonstrate any win through improved runtime numbers?

* The kernels are compiled once, in CI, for many architectures and version combinations. You download the right binary instead of compiling it yourself.
* `version=1` pins the exact build, so everyone running your script gets the same kernel. There is no "it got slower after I updated a package".
* The package exposes a `.layers` attribute with drop-in `nn.Module`s (like `LigerGEGLUMLP`). You swap your module for theirs and nothing else in your model changes.

### Why tuned kernels are better

When we say "tuned", we mean two concrete things, and both are visible in the trace.

| ![Compiled MLP trace with the TorchDynamo, prologue and guard pre-ops boxed on the CPU lane before the compiled graph runs](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/compile-preops.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 14: The compiled run pays for pre-ops (Dynamo, guards, prologue) before any GEMM runs |

> | ![LigerGEGLUMLP trace with an empty box where the compile pre-ops would be, showing the hand-written kernel has no Dynamo or guard overhead](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/no-preops.png) |

Reviewer 4: However, 

<img width="8456" height="1792" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ce189b78-a414-434b-972f-ab5edd738c6a" />

kind of resembles the paradigm of the eager trace. 

<img width="11712" height="1988" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb100fff-fc4c-44d4-9887-dcc6ad151b03" />

(barring the GeLU Mul fusion op)

| ![Profiler trace of the GeGLU MLP forward pass, with five boxed groups on the CPU lane labelled linear, linear, gelu, mul, linear](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-eager.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 7: The profiler trace for a GeGLU MLP |

From Figure 7 we can pat ourselves on the back, as our intuition was correct. Per forward pass (one `mlp_fwd`), the GPU runs exactly 5 kernels:

| Op | CPU op | GPU kernel | launches |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| `gate_proj`| `aten::linear` | `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_bf16_128x128_...`| occupancy query + cudaLaunchKernel |
| `up_proj` | `aten::linear` | `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_bf16_128x128_...`| occupancy query + cudaLaunchKernel |
| `gelu` | `aten::gelu`| `vectorized_elementwise_kernel<4, GeluCUDAKernelImpl...>` | cudaLaunchKernel |
| `h * u` | `aten::mul` | `vectorized_elementwise_kernel<4, ...MulFunctor...>` | cudaLaunchKernel |

> | `down_proj` | `aten::linear` | `ampere_bf16_s16816gemm_bf16_128x256_...` | occupancy query + cudaLaunchKernel |

Reviewer: Perhaps we could highlight the occupancy queries (or one of them) in the image

| ![Profiler table for the GeGLU MLP listing op names and their CUDA times, where metadata ops like aten::transpose and aten::as_strided show 0.000us of CUDA time](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-table.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 8: The table shows that some ops launch zero kernels |

The `aten::t`, `aten::transpose`, `aten::reshape`, `aten::view`, `aten::as_strided`, and `aten::_unsafe_view` ops launch zero kernels. They show `0.000us` of CUDA time in the table (Figure 8) because they only rewrite tensor metadata (shape and stride) on the CPU. A reader scanning the table sees around six op names per linear, but only one of them (`mm`) ever reaches the GPU.

### Why are there two types of GEMM kernels?

> The MLP flattens `[batch, seq, dim]` to `[batch * seq, dim]` for the matmul, so the `8192` below is `batch * seq = 64 * 128`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MLP flattens `[batch, seq, dim]` to `[batch * seq, dim]` for the matmul. In our command-line invocation we used 64 for `batch` and 128 for `seq`, so that's where the `8192` (`batch * seq = 64 * 128`) below comes from.
```

From the trace:

| Linear | `aten::mm` input dims | M·K·N | cuBLAS kernel | avg CUDA |
| :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: | :--: |
| `gate_proj` | `[8192,768] x [768,3072]` | `8192·768·3072` | `…128x128…stages_32x5_tn` | 0.19ms |
| `up_proj` | `[8192,768] x [768,3072]` | `8192·768·3072` | `…128x128…stages_32x5_tn` | 0.19ms |
| `down_proj` | `[8192,3072] x [3072,768]` | `8192·3072·768` | `…128x256…stages_64x3_tn` | 0.17ms |

All three GEMMs have the same FLOP count, `2·8192·768·3072 ≈ 38.7 GFLOP` each, yet `down_proj` is about `10%` faster. Same work, different shape (`N=768` instead of `3072`), so cuBLAS picks a different tile (`128×256`, with a deeper `stages_64x3` pipeline) that gets better reuse for that shape.

> [!NOTE]
> If you want to learn more about tiling in depth, [here is a great resource](https://alvinwan.com/how-to-tile-matrix-multiplication/) to get started with.

> This is exactly why the table had two GEMM rows: the `128x128` row is gate+up and the `128x256` row is down.

Reviewer: Aren't there three rows instead of two? Or is this referring to a different table?

Author: I meant the profiler table, in Figure 9. I see the confusion, will word it better in the latest commit.

> ### What happens with `torch.compile`?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What does `torch.compile` do?
```

Before compiling the `forward` method and visualizing it, let's do the mental exercise again of asking ourselves what we expect to see in the trace. This is a fun experiment, and an important one to repeat every time you profile something yourself. Always build on your intuition, and the moment something does not match, stop and figure out why.

```bash
uv run 03_simple_mlp.py --batch 64 --seq 128 --dim 768 --hidden 3072 --compile
uvx trace-util traces -b traces
```

| ![Profiler trace of the compiled GeGLU MLP showing three aten::mm calls and one fused triton kernel on the CPU lane, labelled mm, mm, fused, mm](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/simple-mlp-compile-trace.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 9: The profiler trace for the compiled GeGLU MLP |

In eager mode, each `nn.Linear` was expanded into a chain of dispatcher ops (`aten::linear` → `aten::t` → `aten::transpose` → `aten::matmul` → `aten::reshape` → `aten::mm`). Those are the high-level wrappers that ATen walks through before reaching the real GEMM. `torch.compile` removes that chain.

> By the time the compiled graph runs, there is no linear, no matmul, no transpose or reshape and those metadata ops were folded into how `mm` is called. We can see three bare `aten::mm` external calls (Figure 9). The proof that it is the same GEMM is that the kernel names are byte-for-byte identical to eager: `...128x128...stages_32x5_tn` for gate and up, and `...128x256...stages_64x3_tn` for down.

Reviewer: I can't see these names in the figure.

| :--: |
| Figure 10: The fused Triton kernel |

This is the headline of the whole compile lesson. The two eager pointwise kernels (GeLU and mul) plus a reshape collapsed into one kernel, `triton_poi_fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul_0` (Figure 10). Let's decode the name:

* `triton`: generated by Inductor's Triton backend (not cuBLAS, not ATen).
* `poi`: pointwise (Inductor tags pointwise kernels `poi`, reductions `red`, and persistent reductions `per`).
* `fused__unsafe_view_gelu_mul`: the ops it merged: the `_unsafe_view` (reshape), the GeLU, and the mul.
* `0`: the unique id within the graph.

Why is this a win? In eager mode, the intermediate `h = gelu(g)` is a full `[8192, 3072]` bf16 tensor (around 50 MB) that the GeLU kernel writes to HBM and the mul kernel immediately reads back. Fusion keeps it in registers (memory that resides inside the chip and are closer than the HBM). The Triton kernel reads `g` and `u` once, computes `gelu(g) * u`, and writes the result once. One whole round trip of the intermediate through global memory is gone.

## Let's use hand tuned kernels

> So far we have let PyTorch (eager) and the compiler (`torch.compile`) pick our kernels. Now we plug in a kernel that a human expert wrote and tuned by hand. We use the `LigerGEGLUMLP` layer, but instead of installing the [Liger library](https://github.com/linkedin/Liger-Kernel) and importing it, we fetch it from the [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels) with the `kernels` library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So far we have let PyTorch (eager) and the compiler (`torch.compile`) pick our kernels. Now we plug in a kernel that a human expert wrote and tuned by hand. We use the `LigerGEGLUMLP` layer, that we can easily fetch from the [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels) with the `kernels` library.
```

* `version=1` pins the exact build, so everyone running your script gets the same kernel. There is no "it got slower after I updated a package".
* The package exposes a `.layers` attribute with drop-in `nn.Module`s (like `LigerGEGLUMLP`). You swap your module for theirs and nothing else in your model changes.

### Why tuned kernels are better

When we say "tuned", we mean two concrete things, and both are visible in the trace.

| ![Compiled MLP trace with the TorchDynamo, prologue and guard pre-ops boxed on the CPU lane before the compiled graph runs](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/compile-preops.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 14: The compiled run pays for pre-ops (Dynamo, guards, prologue) before any GEMM runs |

| ![LigerGEGLUMLP trace with an empty box where the compile pre-ops would be, showing the hand-written kernel has no Dynamo or guard overhead](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/torch-mlp-fusion/no-preops.png) |
| :--: |
| Figure 15: The Liger kernel has no pre-ops — the box where they would be is empty |

> 1. **The fusion is baked in.** The [`LigerGEGLUMLP`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/layers.py#L292) forward is `down_proj(LigerGELUMulFunction.apply(gate_proj(x), up_proj(x)))`. The [`LigerGELUMulFunction`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/geglu.py#L130) runs a single Triton kernel, [`_geglu_tanh_forward_kernel`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/geglu.py#L97), that computes `gelu(gate) * up` in one pass. This is exactly what we saw from `torch.compile`, where the intermediate never makes a round-trip through HBM. We get it here **without the compiler**, as shown in Figures 14 and 15 (no Dynamo guards, no compile latency, no recompilation risk).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **The fusion is baked in.** The [`LigerGEGLUMLP`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/layers.py#L307) forward is `down_proj(LigerGELUMulFunction.apply(gate_proj(x), up_proj(x)))`. The [`LigerGELUMulFunction`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/geglu.py#L130) runs a single Triton kernel, [`_geglu_tanh_forward_kernel`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/geglu.py#L97), that computes `gelu(gate) * up` in one pass. This is exactly what we saw from `torch.compile`, where the intermediate never makes a round-trip through HBM. We get it here **without the compiler**, as shown in Figures 14 and 15 (no Dynamo guards, no compile latency, no recompilation risk).
```

2. **The launch parameters were chosen for the hardware.** The kernel does not guess its block size at random. Liger's [`calculate_settings`](https://huggingface.co/kernels/kernels-community/liger-kernels/blob/v1/build/torch-cuda/geglu.py#L95) picks them from the column count.

> It is worth being honest about what "tuned" does **not** mean. It does not mean "always the fastest for your exact shape". The fused kernel here runs in **92.8 µs**, while Inductor's fused kernel from the compile run was **89.4 µs**. The tuning heuristic is a good general rule (next power of two, capped warps), not an exhaustive per-shape search.

Reviewer: Maybe point out explicitly that compilation only works for static shapes, so you'd have to pay for the compilation cost every time you change shapes. So the "human-made" kernel is not slower than the compiled one: the tradeoff is more "fast generic kernel" vs "specialized kernel for one particular shape of inputs".
